Hi there!
In this video, we will teach you how to add
CSS to HTML code. But before we get to that,
let’s talk about the general structure of
CSS. It consists of several elements. Elements
that indicate WHAT to change are called CSS
properties. Each CSS property can have several
values. For example, to change the text color
you need to use the color property. Please
note that you need to use the American spelling
of “color”; the British one won’t work.
In the function of the value, we specify the
color. For example: blue, red, green, or yellow.
In CSS, there are more than 100 different
colors. We’ll talk about the ways to set
the color in a separate video lesson.
There’s another property called font-family.
Please note, that these two words need to
be written with a hyphen. This property specifies
the font for a text. For the value we’ll
specify a font name, for example, Arial or
“Times New Roman” or something else. If
a font name, like “Times New Roman,” consists
of several words, it has to be written in
quotes. If it consists of one word, quotes
are optional. We’ll talk about fonts in
a separate video.
Now let’s learn how to add these properties
to HTML. There are three ways to do this.
Let’s talk about each of them in turn.
The first way is to write CSS directly in
the tag you want to change. You can do this
with the style attribute. Then we add properties
and corresponding values using the following
form: “property, colon, then the value,
then a semicolon, then the next property,
colon, value, semicolon” and so on. This
method is also called the “inline method.”
For example, in HTML we have 2 <p> tags. On
the screen, you see how these <p> tags are
displayed. Say we want to change the color
of both paragraphs from black to blue. To
do this, we need to add style attribute. Therefore,
we write “style”, equal sign and then
in quotes color, colon, blue and after that
semicolon.
So as you see, we’ve written style attribute
and then its value, by writing “color:blue”
Now, let’s try to do it in practice. Let’s
create a <p> tag in the body with the text
“All your dreams can come true.” Refresh
the page. And we see how it is displayed on
the web page. Now let’s make the paragraph
blue. To do this, let’s write style, equal
sign and then in quotes“color:blue” and
ending with the semicolon. And let’s set
for our paragraph the font-family Arial. As
you can see, our paragraph is blue and in
Arial. Again, let’s have a look. First,
we set the property color. Then colon, then
the value of this property: blue. Then semicolon.
And then the next property font-family, colon,
and the value of this property Arial. And
then again at the end, we have to set a semicolon.
If we had one more property, we would write
this property here.
Now let’s add another <p> tag. For example,
with the text “just do it.” As you see,
the paragraph is in black and in the default
font. And if we want to make this paragraph
blue and in Arial, we have to copy the whole
style attribute and paste it here. If we have
two or three <p> tags, this is more or less
okay. But if I had 10 <p> tags, it wouldn’t
be okay. Because if we needed to change the
color of all the <p> tags from blue to another
color, it wouldn’t be convenient, because
we would have to change each <p> tag, one
at a time.
So that’s why a second way of connecting
CSS was created. In the first way, we added
attribute style. In the second, we just add
a <style> tag. The <style> tag has to be written
in the <head> tag. It’s very, very important.
As you see, I have written in the <style>
tag <p>, and then a pair of curly brackets
(as you see, the opening curly bracket and
the closing one). And then we write color,
colon, blue, semicolon.
Okay, let’s have a closer look at our <style>
tag. So in our <style> tag, I wrote p and
then a pair of curly brackets and the font-family,
colon, Arial, semicolon, and then color, colon,
yellow, semicolon. The p tag is called a selector,
because, among all the tags available, we’re
only selecting the p tags. And here, for example,
color is a property and yellow is a value.
And font-family is also a property and Arial
is a value. Let’s take a look how it works
in practice.
We have to write the <style> tag inside of
the <head> tag. In the <style> tag, we write
p, then curly brackets, and then we simply
need to copy what we did in the previous method.
And we paste it here. We can leave it as it
is or we can write each property on a separate
line.
I highly recommend writing each property on
a separate line, because if we write it this
way, then it’s much easier to read the code.
And as you see, each property starts already
tabbed. I highly recommend applying the same
approach. Now we can delete the <p> tags that
we don’t need. And for the <p> tags that
we do need, we can delete style attribute.
Now let’s see if something changes on our
web page. As you can see, nothing has changed.
So everything works as it worked in the first
way of CSS connecting. No matter how many
<p> tags we add, each <p> tag will be blue
and in Arial.
So, great. This way is much more convenient
than the last one. However, this isn’t even
the best option, since this way only works
for the page that contains the <style> tag.
But then websites typically contain several
pages. For example, index.html and contact-us.html.
To specify the same style for the <p> tags
for every page, we would have to copy the
whole <p> tag with its content and insert
it into each HTML page. And if we wanted to
change the text color in the <p> tag, we would
have to go into every HTML document and change
the color. That would be very inconvenient.
That’s why there’s a third method which
allows us to add CSS with the help of a separate
file. Basically, you create a separate folder
called css. And then in this folder you create
a file called style with a css extension.
Then you connect this file to each HTML page.
As a result, you only need to write the style
once in a separate file, and then it works
for every tag that it’s specified to affect.
The style file gets connected to the same
<head> tag, but in this situation, it’s
done with the help of a <link> tag with two
mandatory attributes: 1) rel with the value
stylesheet - to indicate that we’re connecting
styles and 2) the attribute href to specify
the file which we’re connecting to. In our
example, href will be the following: css/style.css.
In our CSS file, we’ll have a p tag, curly
brackets, and then color: blue.
Let’s see how it works in practice. First,
let’s copy the file index.html and rename
it to contact-us.html.
Now let’s create the folder “CSS,” in
which we will create the file style.css. So
let’s go to Sublime and create a new file.
Let’s save it to the “CSS” folder with
the name “style.css” Now you see that
our file “style.css” is open. Now we will
add the content we wrote before in the <style>
tag. Make sure that you don’t include the
<style> tag, only the content in the <style>
tag.
Now we can delete the <style> tag. Let’s
connect the style.css file to our index.html
file. To do this, we write a <link> tag and
two necessary attributes: rel with the value
“stylesheet” and then href attribute where
we write the path to our file. And that is
css/style.css. Congratulations, we’ve connected
the two files.
Now let’s open the file “contact-us.”
Here we will also delete the <style> tag.
And we will change this content to, for example,
<h1> with the text “Contact Us.” And here
we also connect the CSS file to this page.
Okay, done. Refresh our index.html page. And
we see that everything works.
Now let’s open the contact-us html file.
And we see that the text “Contact Us”
is bold and in black. Why? Because right now,
we have styles only for p tags. So if we also
want a color to h1, what do we need to do?
We have to write in the style.css file “h1”
(and that means we are selecting all h1’s),
then curly brackets, then color, for example,
red. Save it. And refresh the page. As you
see, h1 is red, while all the paragraphs are
blue. So everything works.
To sum things up, if you want to give styles
to one tag, you should use the style attribute.
If you want to give styles to a page, you
should use the <style> tag. And if you want
to give styles to many pages, not just one,
you have to create a separate style.css file
with all the styles in it and then connect
it to the HTML files with the help of a <link>
tag. It’s best to use the third way, since
it allows us to set styles for separate tags,
one page, or many pages and therefore it covers
everything we need.
So that’s all for this lesson. See you in
the next one.